\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-

@c %**start of header
@setfilename fswatch.info

@c Automake automatically updates version.texi to @set VERSION and
@c @set UPDATED to appropriate values.
@include version.texi

@settitle fswatch @value{VERSION}

@dircategory Individual utilities
@direntry
* fswatch: (fswatch).                Cross-platform file change monitor.
@end direntry

@c @finalout

@smallbook

@include value.texi

@defcodeindex op
@defcodeindex fl

@paragraphindent 2
@c %**end of header

@copying
This manual is for @command{fswatch} (version @value{VERSION},
@value{UPDATED}), a cross-platform file change monitor with multiple
backends: Apple OS X @emph{File System Events}, *BSD @emph{kqueue},
Solaris/Illumos @emph{File Events Notification}, Linux @emph{inotify},
Microsoft Windows @code{ReadDirectoryChangesW} and a
@code{stat()}-based backend.

Copyright @copyright{} 2013-2018 Enrico M. Crisostomo

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3
or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation;
with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover
Texts. A copy of the license is included in the section entitled ``GNU
Free Documentation License''.
@end quotation
@end copying

@setchapternewpage odd

@shorttitlepage fswatch
@titlepage
@title fswatch
@subtitle Cross-platform file change monitor with multiple backends
@subtitle for @command{fswatch} version @value{VERSION}, @value{UPDATED}

@author Enrico M. Crisostomo

@c Include the Distribution inside the titlepage so
@c that headings are turned off.

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying

@end titlepage

@c Output the table of contents at the beginning.
@summarycontents
@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top fswatch
@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Version History::                            Version History
* Introduction::                               Introduction
* Tutorial Introduction to @command{fswatch}:: Tutorial Introduction to @command{fswatch}
* Invoking @command{fswatch}::                 Invoking @command{fswatch}
* Monitors::                                   Monitors
* GNU Free Documentation License::             GNU Free Documentation License
* Index of Functions::                         Index of Functions
* Index of Programs::                          Index of Programs
* Index of Files::                             Index of Files
* Index of Command Line Options::              Index of Command Line Options
* General Index::                              General Index
@end menu

@node Version History
@chapter Version History

@section 1.12.0
@itemize
@item
Fix issue 178: Migrate usages of POSIX regular expressions
(@code{<regex.h>}) to the C++11 regex library (@code{<regex>}).

@item
Fix issue 191: Wrong error message is printed when @emph{inotify} event
queue overflows.
@end itemize

@section 1.11.3
@itemize
@item
Fix issue 192: Make the build reproducible.
@end itemize

@section 1.11.2
@itemize
@item
Fix issue 182: Generate a single message catalog for both
@command{fswatch} and @file{libfswatch}.
@end itemize

@section 1.11.1
@itemize
@item
Fix issue 182: Remove mandatory dependency to git.
@end itemize

@section 1.11.0
@itemize
@item
@opindex event@r{, mask}
Fix issue 174: Update the @option{--event} option to accept a numeric
event mask.

@item
Fix issue 181: Make gettext an optional dependency.

@end itemize

@section 1.10.0
@itemize
@item
Fix issue 60: Allow excluding file patterns by passing a file.

@item
Fix issue 119: Merge @command{fswatch} and @file{libfswatch} Autotools
projects into one.

@item
Fix issue 141: Add Docker files for Linux distributions used for
testing.

@item
Add target to build @command{fswatch} on Alpine Linux and Debian.

@end itemize

@section 1.9.3
@itemize
@item
Fix issue 120: C binding is pulling in C++ headers and using C++
constructs.

@item
Fix issue 128: C binding is pulling in C++ headers.

@end itemize

@section 1.9.2
@itemize
@item
Fix issue 118: v. 1.9.0 breaks the @option{-1} option.

@item
@file{libfswatch} @acronym{API} version set to 8:0:2.
@end itemize

@section 1.9.1
@itemize
@item
@file{libfswatch} @acronym{API} version set to 7:0:1.
@end itemize

@section 1.9.0
@itemize
@item
Fix issue 114: @command{fswatch} does not track newly created
directories recursively when using the @emph{inotify} monitor.

@item
Add the possibility of scheduling a periodic event.
@end itemize

@section 1.8.0
@itemize
@item
Add preemptive monitor stop support.
@end itemize

@section 1.7.0
@itemize
@item
Fix issue 35: Support Solaris/Illumos File Events Notification
@acronym{API}.

@item
@opindex directories@r{, inception}
Fix issue 98: Add (@option{-d}, @option{--directories}) option to
request the monitor to watch directories only during a recursive scan.

@item
Fix issue 99: A monitor using the File Events Notification
@acronym{API} of the Solaris/Illumos kernel has been added.

@item
Fix issue 101: Add flag to watch file accesses.
@end itemize

@section 1.6.0
@itemize
@item
@command{fswatch} can be built on Microsoft Windows using Cygwin.

@item
A monitor for Microsoft Windows has been added.

@item
@fnindex @code{fsw_event_flag::Overflow}
@opindex allow-overflow@r{, inception}
@command{fswatch} can survive monitor overflows and notify them as a
specially crafted change event (of type @command{Overflow}) if invoked
with the @option{--allow-overflow} option.
@end itemize

@section 1.5.1

@itemize
@item
@pgindex @command{fswatch-run}
@command{fswatch-run} scripts have been removed.

@item
@cpindex Bash
@cpindex Zsh
As a consequence of the @command{fswatch-run} removal, dependency on at
least one supported shell (Zsh and Bash) has been removed.
@end itemize

@section 1.5.0

@itemize
@item
@opindex event@r{, inception}
Added the @option{--event} option to allow filtering by event type.
@end itemize

@section 1.4.7

@itemize
@item
Fix bug in exclusion filter ordering (PR 75).

@item
@flindex README.md
@file{README.md} improvements.

@item
Documentation improvements.
@end itemize

@section 1.4.6

@itemize
@item
@fnindex fsw_destroy_session
Fix issue 74: Assertion failed on @code{fsw_destroy_session}.
@end itemize

@section 1.4.5.3

@itemize
@item
Fix issue 67: 100% @acronym{CPU} usage while using @file{libfswatch}.
This issue only affects the @emph{inotify} monitor.
@end itemize

@section 1.4.5.2

@itemize
@item
Fix issue 66: Exclude items with @command{poll_monitor} not
considered.
@end itemize

@section 1.4.5.1

@itemize
@item
@cpindex FreeBSD
Do not distribute wrapper scripts for shells which are not installed
(the FreeBSD port system checks shebangs and complains).
@end itemize

@section 1.4.5

@itemize
@item
Add custom record formats.
@end itemize

@section 1.4.4

@itemize
@item
@cpindex @acronym{GNU} gettext
@cpindex gettext
@pgindex gettext
Localize @command{fswatch} and @file{libfswatch} using @acronym{GNU}
@code{gettext}.

@item
Add Spanish (@code{es}) localization.

@item
Add Italian (@code{it}) localization.
@end itemize

@section 1.4.3.2

@itemize
@item
@flindex Makefile.am
Fix @file{Makefile.am} because of broken link when @var{DESTDIR}
installs are performed.
@end itemize

@section 1.4.3.1

@itemize
@item
@pgindex fswatch-run
@pgindex xargs
@cpindex Zsh
Fix bug in @command{fswatch-run} wrapper script for Zsh which caused last
argument not to be split when passed to @file{xargs}.
@end itemize

@section 1.4.3

@itemize
@item
@cpindex batch marker, inception
Add batch marker feature to delimit the boundaries of a batch of
events.

@item
Add Texinfo documentation.

@item
@file{libfswatch} @acronym{API} is now versioned.

@item
@cpindex Autoconf
Improved Autoconf checks.

@item
The @emph{inotify} monitor now waits for events and honours the
latency settings.

@item
@flindex ChangeLog
@cpindex Git
@pgindex git
Automaticaly generate the @file{ChangeLog} file using Git.

@item
@flindex autogen.sh
Update @file{autogen.sh} to honour some commonly used environment
variables.
@end itemize

@section 1.4.2

@itemize
@item
The @emph{inotify} monitor now provides the same functionality
provided by all the other monitors.  Recursive directory monitoring is
now implemented.

@item
@cpindex Git
@pgindex git
Version and revision is now determined dynamically using Git by
ancillary scripts invoked by the @acronym{GNU} Build System.
@end itemize

@section 1.4.1.1

@itemize
@item
@cpindex Apple OS X
@cpindex C++11
@command{fswatch} does not compile on OS X < 10.9 because some
required C++11 classes are not supported by its C++ runtime.
@end itemize

@section 1.4.1

@itemize
@item
@cpindex Apple OS X
@cpindex C++11
@command{fswatch} does not compile on OS X < 10.9 because some
required C++11 classes are not supported by its C++ runtime.
@end itemize

@section 1.4.0

@itemize
@item
@cpindex C++
@cpindex C
The @file{libfswatch} library has been added with bindings for C and
C++.

@item
@command{fswatch} let users specify the monitor to use by name.
@end itemize

@section 1.3.9

@itemize
@item
@opindex include@r{, inception}
Fix Issue 23: Add @option{--include} option.

@item
@opindex include@r{, inception}
Fix Issue 25: Add @option{--include} option.

@item
@opindex include
Paths can be included using @option{-i}/@option{--include} and
providing a set of regular expressions.
@end itemize

@section 1.3.8

@itemize
@item
Fix Issue 34: Diagnostic messages were output by the @emph{inotify}
monitor even if @command{fswatch} was not run in verbose mode.
@end itemize

@section 1.3.7

@itemize
@item
Fix Issue 32: Problems building @command{fswatch} 1.3.6 on Mac
v. 10.8.5.

@item
@cpindex C++11
@cpindex C++, initializer list
Remove usages of C++11 initializer lists so that @command{fswatch}
builds with older compilers.
@end itemize

@section 1.3.6

@itemize
@item
@pgindex fswatch-run
Fix Issue 26: @command{fswatch-run} cannot run a command with arguments.

@item
@pgindex fswatch-run
@cpindex Zsh
@cpindex Bash
@command{fswatch-run} scripts are provided for Zsh and Bash.

@item
@cpindex Zsh
@cpindex Bash
System is scanned during installation to check for Zsh and Bash
availability.  Path of found shells is substituted in the
corresponding scripts, otherwise the default @code{/bin/@var{shell}}
is used.

@item
@pgindex fswatch-run
@cpindex Zsh
@cpindex Bash
If a supported shell is found, the @command{fswatch-run} symbolic link is
created in the installation directory to the corresponding script.
The lookup order of the shells is:

@itemize

@item
Zsh.

@item
Bash.

@end itemize

@end itemize

@section 1.3.5

@itemize
@item
Fix Issue 27: Redirect usage text to standard error unless @option{-h}
or @option{--help}.

@item
Fix bug to write usage to standard error when invalid arguments are
specified.
@end itemize

@section 1.3.4

@itemize
@item
@pgindex fswatch-run
Fix bug in @command{fswatch-run} script to allow arguments to be passed
to the command to run.
@end itemize

@section 1.3.3

@itemize
@item
@opindex one-per-batch@r{, inception}
Add @option{-o}/@option{--one-per-batch} option to print a single
message with the number of change events in the current batch.

@item
@pgindex fswatch-run
Add @command{fswatch-run} shell script to mimic the behaviour of
earlier @command{fswatch} versions and launch the specified command
when change events are received.

@end itemize

@section 1.3.2

@itemize
@item
@pgindex fsw
@cpindex @command{fsw}
@command{fswatch} has been merged with @command{fsw}.
@end itemize

@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction
@command{fswatch} is a file change monitor that receives notifications
when the contents of the specified files or directories are modified.
@command{fswatch} interacts with the operating system using a
@emph{monitor}.  Currently, the following kinds of monitors are
available:

@itemize
@item
@cpindex File System Events, see FSEvents
@cpindex FSEvents, API
@cpindex monitor, FSEvents
@cpindex Apple OS X
A monitor based on the @emph{File System Events} @acronym{API}
(FSEvents) of Apple OS X.

@item
@cpindex FreeBSD
@cpindex BSD
@cpindex kqueue
@cpindex monitor, kqueue
@cpindex Apple OS X
A monitor based on @emph{kqueue}, an event notification interface
introduced in FreeBSD 4.1 and supported on most *BSD systems
(including Apple OS X).

@item
@cpindex Solaris
@cpindex Illumos
@cpindex File Events Notifications
@cpindex monitor, fse
A monitor based on the @emph{File Events Notification} @acronym{API}
of the Solaris kernel and its derivatives, such as Illumos.

@item
@cpindex inotify
@cpindex Linux
@cpindex monitor, inotify
A monitor based on @emph{inotify}, a Linux kernel subsystem that
reports file system changes to applications.

@item
@cpindex Microsoft Windows monitor
@cpindex monitor, Microsoft Windows
@cpindex Microsoft Windows
@fnindex @code{ReadDirectoryChangesW}
A monitor based on the Microsoft Windows' @code{ReadDirectoryChangesW}
function.

@item
@cpindex monitor, poll
@fnindex @command{stat}
A monitor which periodically stats the file system, saves file
modification times in memory and manually calculates file system
changes, which can work on any operating system where the
@code{stat()} function can be used.
@end itemize

@command{fswatch} should build and work correctly on any system
shipping either of the aforementioned APIs.

@section History and @command{fswatch} Authors
@cpindex authors
@pgindex @command{fswatch}
@cpindex @command{fswatch}, initial version
@cpindex FSEvents
@cpindex Apple OS X
@flindex @file{AUTHORS}
Alan @sc{Dipert} wrote the first implementation of @command{fswatch}
in 2009.  This version ran exclusively on Apple OS X and relied on the
@emph{FSEvents} API to get change events from the OS.

@pgindex @command{fsw}
@cpindex FSEvents
@cpindex kqueue
@cpindex inotify
@cpindex Microsoft Windows
At the end of 2013 Enrico M. @sc{Crisostomo} wrote @command{fsw}
aiming at providing not only a drop-in replacement for
@command{fswatch}, but also a tool @emph{portable} across as many
operating systems as possible.  Besides adding support to other
operating systems, @command{fsw} introduced new features such as
inclusion and exclusion filters and customizable output formats.

@cpindex @command{fsw}, merging with @command{fswatch}
@cpindex @command{fswatch}, merging with @command{fsw}
In April 2014 Alan and Enrico, in the best interest of users of either
@command{fswatch} and @command{fsw}, agreed on merging the two
programs together.  At the same time, Enrico was taking over
@command{fswatch} as a maintainer.  As a consequence, development of
@command{fswatch} has continued on its main repository while the
@command{fsw} repository has been frozen.

@section Reporting Bugs and Suggestions
@anchor{Reporting Bugs and Suggestions}
@cpindex bug
@cpindex bug report
@cpindex GitHub
@cpindex @command{fswatch}, repository
@cpindex @command{fswatch}, source code
@flindex CONTRIBUTING.md
If you find problems or have suggestions about this program or this
manual, please report them as new issues in the official GitHub
repository of @command{fswatch} at
@uref{https://github.com/emcrisostomo/fswatch}.
Please, read the @file{CONTRIBUTING.md} file for detailed instructions
on how to contribute to @command{fswatch}.

@node Tutorial Introduction to @command{fswatch}
@chapter Tutorial Introduction to @command{fswatch}
@cpindex tutorial
This chapter is a tutorial walk-through on the most common use cases
where @command{fswatch} is useful:

@itemize
@item Detecting file system changes.
@item Observing file system changes.
@item Processing @command{fswatch} output.
@end itemize

@section Detecting File System Changes
@cpindex changes, detecting
@cpindex @command{fswatch}, bulk mode
A common use case is @emph{detecting} file system changes in a set of
file system objects@footnote{In the context of this manual (unless
specified otherwise), @emph{file system object} refers undistinctively
to @emph{files}, @emph{directories} and @emph{symbolic links}.} where
the @emph{details} of a change are irrelevant.  This mode of operation
is called @emph{bulk mode} and @command{fswatch} will only dump a
single event record per batch@footnote{A @emph{batch} is an iteration
of @command{fswatch} scanning logic, whose frequency is @math{\nu =
l^{-1}}, where @math{l} is the @emph{latency}.}  containing the number
of affected file system objects.  No other details are avaible in the
event record.

@pgindex @command{rsync}
The most common application of this mode of operation is performing a
bulk action on all the observed file system objects, such as a
synchronization with @command{rsync}, which will serve us as an
example.  In this case, a change event triggers the execution of a
synchronization script, no matter the event type kind nor the object
the event affects.

To run @command{fswatch} in batch mode, the (@option{-o},
@option{--one-per-batch}) must be used:

@example
$ fswatch -o @var{path} ...
2
10
@end example

@noindent
The (@option{-l}, @option{--latency}) option can be used to set the
latency according to the requirements:

@example
$ fswatch -o -l 5 @var{path} ...
4
7
@end example

@noindent
This way, you can respond to change events in a way which is (or can
easily be) path-independent (because you are not receiving any event
detail) and you prefer to `bubble' events together to reduce the
overhead of the command being executed.

In bulk mode the output of @command{fswatch} is guaranteed to have the
following structure:

@example
@var{number}\n
@end example

@noindent
@fnindex @command{read}
@pgindex @command{xargs}
where @samp{number} is an integer value and @samp{\n} is the new line
character.  A line with this structure is very easy to read with
either @command{xargs} or the @command{read} builtin:

@example
$ fswatch -o @var{path} | while read @var{num} ; \
  do \
    ... \
  done
@end example

In many scripts of this kind, the @var{num} variable can even be
ignored.

@section Observing File System Changes
@anchor{Observing File System Changes}
@cpindex changes, observing
@cpindex @command{fswatch}, main mode
Besides the batch mode, @command{fswatch} provides a @emph{main} mode
providing the full change events details and the file system objects
they refer to.  The main mode is @command{fswatch}'s @emph{default}
mode of operation and needs no specific flags to be activated.

In this mode, @command{fswatch} outputs change events to the standard
output.  By default, only the affected file name is printed and the
change event record structure has the following structure:

@example
@var{path}\n
@end example

@noindent
where @var{path} is the full path of the changed file system object.

@command{fswatch} lets users customize the format of the event record
and the information it includes.  For example:

@itemize
@item
@cpindex timestamp, add
The event @emph{timestamp} can be added.

@item
@cpindex event mask, add
The event mask can be added in either textual or numerical form.

@item
@cpindex record, format
The event record can be defined using a @command{printf}-like format
string.

@end itemize

@subsection Event details
Beside the full path of the change object, details on the kind of
change event can be obtained using the (@option{-x},
@option{--event-flags}) option:

@example
$ fswatch -xr @var{/path/to/observe}
/path/to/observe Created Renamed OwnerModified IsFile
...
@end example

@noindent
In this case, a space-separated list of change flags are printed after
the path of the changed object.  The record structure is thus:

@example
/absolute-path flag ( flag)*
@end example

@noindent
where @samp{flag} is an event flag.  At least one event flag is always
present, and additional ones are `bubbled' into the same record and
separated by space.  For more information on event flags @pxref{Event
Flags}.

@subsection Parseability Issues
@cpindex parseability
@cpindex record, parsing
The default record format is intuitive and human-readable.  However,
since a Unix file name may contain any character but the path
separator @samp{/} and the @samp{NUL}@footnote{Depending on the file
system being used, other restrictions may apply.  However, for file
system portability reasons, you should consider @samp{NUL} as the only
forbidden character.} character, it suffers from two classes of
parseability issues:

@itemize
@item
The default choice of using @samp{\n} as record separator may lead to
unexpected results because a file name can legally contain @samp{\n}.
@pgindex @command{find}
@pgindex @command{xargs}
For this reason, along the line of what other tools such as
@command{find} and @command{xargs} already do, the @samp{NUL}
character (@samp{\0}) can alternatively be used:

@example
/absolute-path( flag)*\0
@end example

@item
Since a file name may contain spaces, this record structure is not
unambigually parseable if more than one event flag is present: in this
case, any subset @math{[0, x], x < n - 1} of the @math{n} event flags
may be part or the file name and hence any parse result would be
indeterminate.

@end itemize

Both issues can be solved using a custom record format (@pxref{Custom
Record Formats}).

@subsection Numeric Event Flags
@cpindex event, flags
@cpindex event, flags, numeric
Instead of using user-friendly event flag @emph{names}, as seen in the
previous section, @emph{numeric} event flags can be used instead.
Currently, the real advantage this method offers, despite possibly
cleaner flag-decoding logic, is the availability of a non-ambigous
event record representation.

To instruct @command{fswatch} to print numeric event flags, the
(@option{-n}, @option{--numeric}) option must be used:

@example
$ fswatch -xnr @var{/path/to/observe}
/absolute-path 2058
@end example

@noindent
The numeric event flag value is the bitwise OR of the individual event
flag values, that are powers of 2.  In the previous example, the flag
@math{2058} is decomposed in powers of 2 as @math{2058 = 2048 + 8 + 2
= 2^{11} + 2^3 + 2}, that is, the first, the third and the eleventh
event flags.

@section Processing @command{fswatch} Output
@cpindex record, parsing
@cpindex record, piping
Very often you wish to not only receive an event, but also react to
it.  The simplest way to do it is piping the output of
@command{fswatch} to another process.  Since in Unix and Unix-like
file system file names may potentially contain any character but
@samp{NUL} (@samp{\0}) and the path separator (@samp{/}),
@command{fswatch} has a specific mode of operation when its output
must be piped to another process.  When the (@option{-0},
@option{--print0}) option is used, @command{fswatch} will use the
@samp{NUL} character as record separator, thus allowing any other
character to appear in a path.
@fnindex @command{read}
This is important because many commands and shell builtins (such as
@command{read}) split lines using the newline character (@samp{\n})
and words using the characters in @env{$IFS}, which by default
contains characters which may be present in a file name, resulting in
a wrong event path being received and processed.

@pgindex @command{xargs}
The simplest way to pipe @command{fswatch}'s output to another program
is using @command{xargs}:

@example
$ fswatch -0 (@var{opts})* (@var{paths})+ | xargs -0 -n 1 -I @{@} @var{command}
@end example

@noindent
The command in this example does the following:

@itemize
@item
@code{fswatch -0} will split records using the @samp{NUL}
character.

@item
@code{xargs -0} will split records using the @samp{NUL} character.
This is required to correctly match impedance with @command{fswatch}.

@item
@code{xargs -n 1} will invoke @code{@var{command}} every record.  If
you want to do it every @code{@var{x}} records, then use @code{xargs
-n @var{x}}.

@item
@code{xargs -I @{@}} will substitute occurrences of @code{@{@}} in
@code{@var{command}} with the parsed argument.  If the command you are
running does not need the event path name, just delete this option.
If you prefer using another replacement string, substitute @code{@{@}}
with another string of your choice.
@end itemize

@section Detecting the Boundaries of a Batch of Changes
@cpindex batch marker
@opindex batch-marker@r{, detail}
If a process or script is piped to @command{fswatch} output, sometimes
it would be desirable to detect the `boundaries' of a batch of
changes.  This way, the process receiving the stream of changes would
rely on the timings imposed by the latency settings of
@command{fswatch} to start a phase of events @emph{processing} after a
phase or events @emph{gathering}.  The @option{--batch-marker} option
can be used to accomplish this task:

@example
$ fswatch --batch-marker -r ~
/home/fswatch/.zsh_history.LOCK
NoOp
/home/fswatch/.zsh_history.new
/home/fswatch/.zsh_history
/home/fswatch/.zsh_history.LOCK
NoOp
@end example

@noindent
In this example, the @samp{NoOp} records mark the end of the 1 second
batches of events output by @command{fswatch}.  The batch marker can
be customized.  For more information @ref{Batch Marker}.

@section Receiving a Single Event
@cpindex single event
@opindex one-event@r{, detail}
Another feature of @command{fswatch} is the possibility of receiving a
@emph{single} event and exit.  This is most useful when existing
scripts processing events include the restart logic of
@command{fswatch}.  This use case is implemented by the @option{-1},
@option{--one-event} option:

@example
$ fswatch -1 /path/to/watch
/path/to/watch/child0
/path/to/watch/child1
...
$
@end example

@node Invoking @command{fswatch}
@chapter Invoking @command{fswatch}
@cpindex syntax
This chapter is about how @command{fswatch} is invoked.  There are
many options and two styles for writing them.

@section Synopsis of @command{fswatch}
@command{fswatch} is invoked using the following syntax:

@example
fswatch (options)* (paths)+
@end example

@noindent
@fnindex @command{realpath}
@command{fswatch} interprets file names as being relative to the
working directory and canonicalizes them using @command{realpath}.

If a directory is used as an argument, the directory object is watched
and, optionally and depending on the monitor being used, the directory
is scanned recursively and all its children are watched as well.

Depending on the monitor being used, recursively scanning huge
directory hierarchies or big set of files may be resource consuming,
@acronym{CPU} intensive or even impossible.  The characteristics of
the available monitors in a system should be assessed in order to
choose the best monitor according to the specific needs.

Besides successful exits@footnote{Depending on the monitor and options
being used, @command{fswatch} may not exit unless @emph{stopped} with
a signal such as @code{TERM} or @code{QUIT}.}, indicated with the exit
code 0, @command{fswatch} may exit with an error.  @command{fswatch}
will try to print a diagnostic description on @code{stderr} when an
unexpected error occurs.

@cpindex exit codes
@cpindex error codes
The documented@footnote{Exit codes are documented in @file{c/error.h}
of @command{libfswatch}.} exit codes of @command{fswatch} are the
following:

@table @asis
@item 0
@code{FSW_EXIT_OK}: No error occurred.

@item 1
@code{FSW_EXIT_UNK_OPT}: An unknown option was input.

@item 2
@code{FSW_EXIT_USAGE}: Help message was requested.

@item 3
@code{FSW_EXIT_LATENCY}: Invalid latency.

@item 4
@code{FSW_EXIT_STREAM}: A stream related problem occurred.

@item 5
@code{FSW_EXIT_ERROR}: An unkown error occurred.

@item 6
@code{FSW_EXIT_ENFILE}: A file could not be opened.

@item 7
@code{FSW_EXIT_OPT}: Unused.

@item 8
@code{FSW_EXIT_MONITOR_NAME}: The specified monitor does not exist.

@item 9
@code{FSW_EXIT_FORMAT}: The specified monitor is invalid.

@end table

@section The Two Option Styles
@command{fswatch} implements two option styles which are common in
Unix and Unix-like operating systems and GNU software: @emph{short}
and @emph{long} options.  The biggest difference between short and
long options are argument placing (for options taking one).

@fnindex @command{getopt_long}
Whether long options are available in a system depend on the
availability of the @command{getopt_long} function at build time.  For
this reason, users should familiarise themselves with short options
and use them when possible and do not rely on long options to be
available on any @command{fswatch} installation.

@subsection Long Options
@cpindex options, long
@cpindex long options
@fnindex @command{getopt_long}
In systems where the @command{getopt_long} function is available, each
short option has a corresponding long option with a @emph{mnemonic}
name starting with two dashes (e.g.: @option{--version}).  Long
options are meant to be easy to remember and to provide hints about
what a command is going to perform.  The following command:

@example
$ fswatch --event-flags --numeric --recursive ~
@end example

@noindent
is clearer than:

@example
$ fswatch -xnr ~
@end example

If a long option takes an argument, it can be specified in two ways,
depending on whether the argument is optional or mandatory:

@itemize
@item
Separating the argument from the option name with an equal sign, if
the argument is of either kind.

@example
$ fswatch --latency=5 ~
@end example

@item
Separating the argument from the option name with any amount of white
space, if the argument is mandatory.

@example
$ fswatch --latency 5 ~
@end example

@end itemize

@subsection Short Options
@cpindex options, short
@cpindex short options
Most options have a @emph{short} form consisting of a dash followed by
a single character, such as @option{-l} (which is equivalent to
@option{--latency}).  When available, a short form is interchangeable
with the long one.

If a short option takes an argument, it can be specified in two ways:

@itemize
@item
Separating the argument from the option name with any amount of white
space:

@example
$ fswatch -l 5 ~
@end example

@item
Joining the argument to the option name:

@example
$ fswatch -l5 ~
@end example
@end itemize

Short options can be stuck together provided all the options but the
last one take no argument, in which case it can be specified as
described above.  The command:

@example
$ fswatch -xnrl 5 ~
@end example

@noindent
is equivalent to:

@example
$ fswatch -x -n -r -l 5 ~
@end example

@noindent
where @samp{5} is the argument of @option{-l}.

@section @command{fswatch} Options
@cpindex options
@cpindex options, list
In the following table you can find the list, in alphabetical order,
of @command{fswatch}'s options.

@table @option

@opsummary{access}
@item --access
@itemx -a

Monitor file access.  This functionality is supported by selected
monitors only.

@opsummary{allow-overflow}
@item --allow-overflow

Sets the allow overflow flag of the monitor.  When this flag is set,
monitor buffer overflows are reported as change events of type
@code{fsw_event_flag::Overflow}.

@opsummary{batch-marker}
@item --batch-marker

Print a marker at the end of every batch.

@opsummary{directories}
@item --directories
@itemx -d

Request the monitor to watch directories only during a recursive scan.
This feature helps reducing the number of open file descriptors if a
generic change event for a directory is acceptable instead of events
on directory children.

@opsummary{event}
@item --event
Filter events by @emph{type} using the specified event name or numeric
mask (@pxref{Filtering by Event Type}).  Specified event names are
@emph{included} in the output.  Multiple event types can be specified
using this option multiple times.

@opsummary{event-flags}
@item --event-flags
@itemx -x

Print the event flags.

@opsummary{event-flag-separator}
@item --event-flag-separator

Use the specified string as event flag separator.

@opsummary{exclude}
@item --exclude
@itemx -e

Exclude paths matching @command{@var{regex}}.

@opsummary{extended}
@item --extended
@itemx -E

Use extended regular expressions.

@opsummary{filter-from}
@item --filter-from

Load filters from the specified @command{@var{file}}.

@opsummary{fire-idle-events}
@item --fire-idle-events

Fire idle events.

@opsummary{follow-links}
@item --follow-links
@itemx -L
Symbolic links are followed instead of being watched as file system
objects.

@opsummary{format}
@item --format

Use the specified record format.

@opsummary{format-time}
@item --format-time
@itemx -f

Print the event time using the specified @command{@var{format}}.

@opsummary{help}
@item --help
@itemx -h

Show the help message.

@opsummary{include}
@item --include
@itemx -i

Include paths matching @command{@var{regex}}.

@opsummary{insensitive}
@item --insensitive
@itemx -I

Use case insensitive regular expressions.

@opsummary{latency}
@item --latency
@itemx -l

Set the latency using the specified @command{@var{value}}.

@opsummary{list-monitors}
@item --list-monitors
@itemx -M

List the available monitors.

@opsummary{monitor}
@item --monitor
@itemx -m

Use the specified @command{@var{monitor}}.

@opsummary{monitor-property}
@item --monitor-property

Pass the specified property to the monitor (@pxref{Monitor
Tunables}).

@opsummary{numeric}
@item --numeric
@itemx -n

Print a numeric event mask.

@opsummary{one-per-batch}
@item --one-per-batch
@itemx -o

Print a single message with the number of change events in the current
batch.

@opsummary{one-event}
@item --one-event
@itemx -1

Exit @command{fswatch} after the first set of events is received.

@opsummary{print0}
@item --print0
@itemx -0

Use the @acronym{ASCII} @samp{NUL} (@samp{\0}) as record separator.

@opsummary{recursive}
@item --recursive
@itemx -r

Recurse subdirectories.

@opsummary{timestamp}
@item --timestamp
@itemx -t

Print the event timestamp.

@opsummary{utc-time}
@item --utc-time
@itemx -u

Print the event time as @acronym{UTC} time.

@opsummary{verbose}
@item --verbose
@itemx -v

Print verbose output.

@opsummary{version}
@item --version

Print the version of fswatch and exit.

@end table

@section Whitespace and Record Format
@anchor{Whitespace and Record Format}
@cpindex whitespace
@cpindex record, format
As seen in @ref{Observing File System Changes}, file names may contain
characters such as @samp{\n} which are commonly used as line
separators.  Many commonly used Unix commands and shell builtins use
characters in the @env{$IFS} environment
variable@footnote{@acronym{IFS, Internal Field Separators}.}  as
@emph{separators} to split words.  By default, @env{$IFS} contains the
characters @samp{ } (@kbd{SPC}), @samp{\t}, @samp{\n} and @samp{\0}
(@samp{NUL}).

Therefore, if a file contains such a separator character (and all but
@samp{NUL} are @emph{legal}), then a parsing ambiguity may arise when
using certain record formats such as:

@example
@var{path}( @var{flag})+
@end example

@noindent
In this case, for example, if @math{n > 1} @var{flags} are present in
the record, and hence more than one @samp{ } (@kbd{SPC}) is present,
then it is not known whether any subset containing a number @math{x}
of consecutive flags (@math{x < n}) is part of the path or not.

The same reasoning applies when splitting @emph{lines} instead of
@emph{words}: since @samp{\n} may be a legal file name character, then
it is now known whether @samp{\n} indicates a record's end or simply
is part of a file name.

For this reason, in order to avoid parsing ambiguity, this options
instructs @command{fswatch} to use @acronym{ASCII} @samp{NUL} as
record separator.

@quotation Warning
The use of the @option{--print0} solves the @emph{line} splitting
ambiguity but not the @emph{word} splitting ambiguity when using
textual event flags.  A solution to this problem is provided by
@emph{custom record formats} (@pxref{Custom Record Formats}).

Another way to get an unambiguous record format is using
@emph{numeric} event flags (@pxref{Numeric Event Flags}).
@end quotation

@section Custom Record Formats
@anchor{Custom Record Formats}
@cpindex record, format, custom
To solve the problem of line splitting ambiguities and to provide
users the possibilities of tailoring the record format to their needs,
@command{fswatch} allows users to specify the event record
@emph{format} using the @option{--format} option.

This options requires a @command{printf}-like@footnote{Although the
available directive are much less than what @command{printf} offers.}
@emph{format string} ordinary text containing zero or more
@emph{directives}.  Characters not belonging to a format directive are
copied unchanged to the output, while directives are interpreted and
replaced with the result of their evaluation.

@subsection Format Directives
@cpindex record, format, directives
@cpindex record, format, escape character
Directives start with @samp{%} which is always treated as a special
character: either it marks the beginning of a directive or it is
interpreted as an escape character@footnote{Which is the same as
considering escaped characters the result of a directive.}.

The available directives are:

@table @command
@item %%
@cpindex @command{%%}, format directive
Inserts the @samp{%} character.

@item %0
@cpindex @command{%0}, format directive
Inserts an @acronym{ASCII} @samp{NUL} (@samp{0}) character.

@item %n
@cpindex @command{%n}, format directive
Inserts a @emph{newline} character.

@item %f
@cpindex @command{%f}, format directive
Inserts the list of event flags, separated by default by the space
character (@samp{ }) or by the separator specified with the
@option{--event-flag-separator} option (@pxref{Event Flag Separator}).

@item %p
@cpindex @command{%p}, format directive
Inserts the path.

@item %t
@cpindex @command{%t}, format directive
Inserts the timestamp, formatted with @command{strftime} using the
format optionally specified with the @option{--format-time} option.
@end table

@subsection Record Termination
Each record is terminated by either a newline character (@samp{\n}) or
an @acronym{ASCII} @samp{NUL} character when @option{-0} is specified.
The record termination character has the following characteristics:

@itemize
@item
It is @emph{not} part of the format string.

@item
Its value can only be chosen between @samp{\n} and @samp{NUL} (@samp{\0}).

@item
It cannot be suppressed.
@end itemize

@subsection Event Flag Separator
@anchor{Event Flag Separator}
@cpindex event flag, separator
@cpindex format, event flag separator
When the list of event flags is printed, textual items are separated
by default by spaces (@samp{ }).  The user can specify an alternate
event flag separator using the @option{--event-flag-separator} and
passing the desired separator string as argument.

For instance, if the user wants event flags to be separated by a
comma, the following command can be used:

@example
$ fswatch --event-flag-separator=, -x (options)* (paths)+
@end example

@subsection Builtin Formats
@cpindex format, builtin
The format used by @command{fswatch} when a custom format is not
specified is determined as follows@footnote{In the following example,
the record termination character is not shown.}:

@itemize
@item
@samp{%t } is added at the beginning of the format string if
@option{-t} is used.

@item
@samp{%p} is always appended to the format string.

@item
@samp{ %f} is added at the end of the format string if @option{-x} is
used.
@end itemize

@section Batch Marker
@anchor{Batch Marker}
@cpindex batch marker
@opindex batch-marker@r{, detail}
Since @command{fswatch} typically outputs an @emph{endless} event
stream, processing parties parsing its output may be interested in
`batch event processing': that is, processing batches of events
instead of endlessly processing events one by one.

To support this use case, @command{fswatch} provides the
@option{--batch-marker} option; when specified, @command{fswatch} will
output a customizable `batch marker record' processing parties can use
as batch @emph{delimiters}.  Batch demarcation is made naturally using
the monitor's processing loop and its latency setting: every time the
monitor loops (typically when latency is elapsed), then a batch marker
is printed as final record, as shown in the next example:

@example
$ fswatch --batch-marker -r ~
/home/fswatch/.zsh_history.LOCK
NoOp
/home/fswatch/.zsh_history.new
/home/fswatch/.zsh_history
/home/fswatch/.zsh_history.LOCK
NoOp
@end example

@noindent
By default, the batch marker takes the form of a single-line record:

@example
NoOp(\n | \0)
@end example

@noindent
terminated with either @samp{\n} or @samp{NUL} (@samp{\0}) depending
on other @command{fswatch} settings.  However, the user can customize
it by providing the desired marker string as optional argument to
@option{--batch-marker}:

@example
% ./fswatch --batch-marker="*** BATCH END ***" -r ~
/home/fswatch/.zsh_history.LOCK
*** BATCH END ***
@end example

@section Idle events
@cpindex event, idle
An @emph{idle} event is a special event type that can optionally be
emitted by @command{fswatch} if no change events were collected in a
period of time whose average length is equal to the monitor latency
(@pxref{Latency}).  Idle events come in handy when an observer wants
to perform an operation every time a change is detected @emph{or}
after a specified amount of time even if no changes were detected.

Idle events were introduced in version 1.9.0 and are available only
when @command{fswatch} is built on a platform that supports C++11
threads (@command{std::thread}) and can be enabled using the
@option{--fire-idle-events} option.

An idle event has got the following characteristics:

@itemize
@item
It has an empty path.

@item
It is of type @command{NoOp}.
@end itemize

@section Filtering by Path
@cpindex path filter
@cpindex path filter, inclusion
@cpindex path filter, exclusion
Filters are @emph{regular expression} which are evaluated against the
monitored object path to determine whether a path must be accepted or
rejected.  Sometimes, the exclusion of a path may result in the
exclusion of an object from the list of monitored objects, while other
times a path must be evaluated only when an event is detected and in
this case the corresponding object cannot be removed from the
monitored object list in advance@footnote{This behaviour is
monitor-specific.}.

Event though event @emph{filtering} is commonly performed when
processing @command{fswatch} output, the possibility of filtering
paths `at the source' provides not only a greater amount of
flexbility, but also:

@itemize
@item
Improved performance, since @command{fswatch} will only monitor
matching objects@footnote{Whether an object whose path is matched by
an exclusion filter is monitored or not is a monitor-specific
implementation detail.}.

@item
Less resource pressure, especially when resource-intensive monitors
are used.  This is especially important when using monitors that rely
on the availability of open file descriptors for any monitored object.

@item
Simpler processing logic, since part of the path filtering logic is
performed by @command{fswatch}.
@end itemize

@fnindex @command{regcomp}
Filters are implemented using the C++11 @code{<regex>} library.  This
feature is now required to successfully build @command{libfswatch} and
@command{fswatch}.

@subsection Specifying Filters
@cpindex path filter
@cpindex path filter, file
@opindex include@r{, detail}
@opindex exclude@r{, detail}
@opindex from-file@r{, detail}

Path filters can be specified in two ways:

@itemize
@item
By using the @option{--include} and @option{--exclude} options and the
modifier options @option{--extended} and @option{--insensitive}.

@item
By loading them from a file using the @option{--from-file} option.
@end itemize

@subsubsection Filter File Format
@cpindex path filter, file
The filter file is made up of @emph{records} separated by a new line
charactere, or formally a @acronym{ASCII} @samp{LF} (line feed)
character.  The structure of the record is the following:

@example
type pattern
@end example

@noindent
where @samp{type} indicated the filter type and @samp{pattern} is the
filter regular expression.  @samp{type} may contain the following
characters:

@itemize
@item
@samp{+} or @samp{-}, to indicate respectively whether the filter is
an inclusion or an exclusion filter.

@item
@samp{e} to use an extended regular expression.

@item
@samp{i} to use a case insensitive regular expression.
@end itemize

The following filter file instructs @command{fswatch} to ignore all
files except those ending in @samp{.cpp}, ignoring case.

@example
- .*
+i \.cpp$
@end example


@subsection Types of Filters and Order of Execution
@cpindex path filter, type
@cpindex path filter, exexution order
@cpindex path filter, inclusion
@cpindex path filter, exclusion
Two types of filters are available:

@itemize
@item
@emph{Inclusion} filters.

@item
@emph{Exclusion} filters.
@end itemize

As their name indicates, they are used to include and exclude paths
from the monitored object list and from resulting events.
@command{fswatch} processes filters this way:

@itemize
@item
If a path matches an including filter, the path is accepted no matter
any other filter.

@item
If a path matches an excluding filter, the path is rejected.

@item
If a path matches no filters, the path is accepted.
@end itemize

@noindent
Said another way:

@itemize
@item
All paths are accepted @emph{by default}, unless an exclusion filter
says otherwise.

@item
Inclusion filters may override any other exclusion filter.

@item
The order in the definition of filters in the command line has no effect.
@end itemize

@subsection Filter Modifiers
@cpindex path filter, modifier
@fnindex @command{regcomp}
Filters are regular expression executed using the
@uref{http://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/009695399/functions/regcomp.html,
@command{regcomp} function} which is able to interpret case-sensitive
and case-insensitive @emph{basic} and @emph{extended} regular
expressions as described in
@uref{http://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/009695399/functions/regcomp.html,
Base Definitions volume of @acronym{IEEE} Std 1003.1-2001@comma{}
Chapter 9@comma{} Regular Expressions}.

@cpindex patch filter, case sensitivity
The (@option{--insensitive}, @option{-I}) option instructs
@command{fswatch} to use case insensitive regular expressions.  The
following example adds an exclusion filter so that @command{fswatch}
ignores any file system object whose name ends with @kbd{.log}, no
matter the case.

@example
$ fswatch -Ie ".*\.log$" ~
@end example

@cpindex path filter, regular expression
@cpindex path filter, extended regular expression
The (@option{--extended}, @option{-E}) option instructs
@command{fswatch} to use extended regular expressions, such as:

@example
$ fswatch -Ee "xl[st]+" ~
@end example

Treating the characteristics and the difference between different
kinds of regular expressions is out of scope in this manual.

@section Filtering by Event Type
@anchor{Filtering by Event Type}
@cpindex filter, by event type
@cpindex event type filter
Events can be filtered by event type passing @command{fswatch} a list of
event type @emph{names} or masks to accept using the @option{--event}
option:

@example
$ fswatch -x --event Created --event Removed ~
$ fswatch -x --event 10 ~
@end example

In this example, the mask of the @command{Created} event is @command{2}
and the mask of the @command{Removed} event is @command{8}, so the mask
of both events is @command{10}.

If no event type filters are specified, @command{fswatch} will accept
events of any type; on the other hand, as soon as a filter is specified,
only events with a matching type will be accepted.

@section Latency
@anchor{Latency}
@cpindex latency
@opindex latency@r{, detail}
The @emph{latency} @math{l}, expressed in seconds, is the amount of
time that passes between the moment @command{fswatch} outputs a set of
detected changes and the next.  What happens during the time
in-between is a monitor-specific implementation detail.

Some @acronym{API}s, such as OS X's FSEvents, implement the concept of
latency themselves and @command{fswatch} appears idle in between.
Only when the specified amount of time passes, change events are
received, processed and written to standard output.  Others, such as
Linux's inotify, do not@footnote{inotify publishes changes on a file
identified by a descriptor which is @command{read} by
@command{fswatch}.}; in this case, the inotify monitor @emph{waits}
for events a maximum of @math{l} seconds; after that, the monitor
logic loops again, performs house-keeping activities@footnote{Such as
re-scanning objects which did not exist in the previous iteration.}
and starts waiting again.

The important thing to keep in mind is that latency and a monitor's
behaviour are implementation-dependent: check the documentation of the
monitor you are using to get further information about how latency is
handled.

@section Symbolic Links
@cpindex symbolic link
@opindex follow-links@r{, detail}
Symbolic links are commonly used file system objects and, as it is
customary for file system utilities, @command{fswatch} can either
@emph{follow} them and monitor the linked object@footnote{When
following links, the resolution is recursive: that is, if a link
points to another symbolic link, this link is followed as well, and so
on, until an object of a different kind is found.} or monitor the link
itself.

@section Event Flags
@anchor{Event Flags}
@cpindex event flag
@opindex event-flags@r{, detail}
Event flags identify the kind of change a file system object has
undergone.  Many of them directly map to common file system operations
(such as creation, deletion, update, etc.), others are less common
(such as attribute modification), and others are monitor and platform
specific.

Currently, @command{fswatch} maps monitor-specific event flags to
`global' event flags acting as a sort of `greatest common denominator'
of all the available monitor flags.  The list of all the available
global event flags, defined in @file{c/cevent.h}, is the following:

@table @code
@item NoOp
Idle event, optionally issued when no changes were detected.

@item PlatformSpecific
This event maps a platform-specific event that has no corresponding
flag.

@item Created
The object has been created.

@item Updated
The object has been updated.  The kind of update is monitor-dependent.

@item Removed
The object has been removed.

@item Renamed
The object has been renamed.

@item OwnerModified
The object's owner has changed.

@item AttributeModified
An object's attribute has changed.

@item MovedFrom
The object has moved from this location to a new location of the same
file system.

@item MovedTo
The object has moved from another location in the same file system
into this location.

@item IsFile
The object is a regular file.

@item IsDir
The object is a directory.

@item IsSymLink
The object is a symbolic link.

@item Link
The object link count has changed.

@item Overflow
The monitor has overflowed.
@end table

@subsection Peculiarities and Pitfalls
@cpindex event flag, peculiarities
@cpindex event flag, pitfalls
As you can see, the list of event flags contains element whose meaning
is overlapping, at least partially.  @command{Link}, for instance, may
be equivalent to @command{Create} or @command{Removed}, depending on
the whether the new link count is 1 or 0.  @command{MovedFrom} and
@command{MovedTo} may be equivalent to @command{Create} and
@command{Removed} if the monitor is unable to discern a move operation
has taken place (which is not always possible, as in the case of the
poll monitor).

@command{fswatch} is unable to univocally map the specific flags of
all the monitors consistently.  Forcefully, the mapping depends on the
capabilities of the monitor which, in turn, depend on the capabilities
of the @acronym{API} being used.

For this reason, when processing change events, either the behaviour
of the underlying monitor is known and taken into account, or all the
flags which could possibly be attached at the operation being looked
for must be taken into account.

@quotation Warning
As already explained (@pxref{Whitespace and Record Format}), the
record format when using event flags in textual form is ambiguous.
For this reason, using numeric event flags (@pxref{Numeric Event
Flags}) or a custom record format (@pxref{Custom Record Formats}) is
recommended when @command{fswatch} output must be processed.
@end quotation

@subsection Numeric Event Flags
@anchor{Numeric Event Flags}
@cpindex event flag, numeric
@opindex numeric@r{, detail}
When using the (@option{--numeric}, @option{-n}) @command{fswatch}
will output event flags in @emph{numeric} format.  A change event
record may have multiple event flags and the numeric value is
calculated as the bitwise @command{or} of the numeric values of all
the flags.  Since the value of an event flag is guaranteed to be
unique and to be a number @math{n} in the form @math{n = 2^k} for a
certain integer @math{k}, then the numeric value of a set of event
flags is univocally determined.

To check whether a given event flag is present when processing
@command{fswatch} output, iti s sufficient to check whether its bit is
set to 1 in the event value.  Let's suppose we want to check whether
the event flag whose value is @math{e} is present in a record whose
flag numerical value is @math{n}.  If the result @math{r} of

@tex
$$ r = e \wedge b $$
@end tex

@noindent
where @math{\wedge} is the bitwise @command{and} operator, is @math{r
> 0}, then the flag @math{e} is present in @math{n}.

The numeric value of all the event flags is the following:

@itemize
@item @command{NoOp}: 0
@item @command{PlatformSpecific}: 1
@item @command{Created}: 2
@item @command{Updated}: 4
@item @command{Removed}: 8
@item @command{Renamed}: 16
@item @command{OwnerModified}: 32
@item @command{AttributeModified}: 64
@item @command{MovedFrom}: 128
@item @command{MovedTo}: 256
@item @command{IsFile}: 512
@item @command{IsDir}: 1024
@item @command{IsSymLink}: 2048
@item @command{Link}: 4096
@item @command{Overflow}: 8192
@end itemize

@section Choosing a Monitor
@anchor{Choosing a Monitor}
@cpindex monitor, choosing
@opindex monitor@r{, detail}
@command{fswatch} is a front-end to multiple @emph{monitors}, each
taking advantage of different monitoring @acronym{API}s that may be
available in a system.  When building @command{fswatch},
@command{configure} scans the system to check which @acronym{API}s are
available and builds support for all of them.

A `special' monitor, the @emph{poll} monitor, manually scans the file
system looking for differences.  This is a fallback monitor for
situations where other, more efficient @acronym{API}s are not
available.  The poll monitor is available on any system providing the
@command{stat} function.

Although @command{fswatch} chooses the `best' monitor between the
available ones, a user may wish to use another.  A specific monitor
can be chosen using the (@option{--monitor}, @option{-m}) option.  The
list of available monitors can be obtained using the
(@option{--list-monitors}, @option{-M}) option or at the end of the
help message:

@example
$ fswatch --list-monitors
  fsevents_monitor
  kqueue_monitor
  poll_monitor
@end example

@example
$ fswatch --help
[...]
Available monitors in this platform:

  fsevents_monitor
  kqueue_monitor
  poll_monitor
[...]
@end example

@noindent
A monitor can then be chosen by passing the mandatory
@samp{@var{name}} argument to the @option{-m} option:

@example
$ fswatch -m kqueue_monitor ~
@end example

@noindent
In this case, the @samp{kqueue_monitor} is manually chosen.

@section Recursive Scanning
@cpindex recursive scanning
@cpindex monitor, recursive scanning
@opindex recursive@r{, detail}
@command{fswatch}'s behaviour when scanning a directory may vary on a
monitor by monitor basis.  The semantics of the (@option{--recursive},
@option{-r}) option is: recursively scan subdirectories.  However,
implementations may silently add `@emph{if the monitor does not do so
already}'.  Since each monitor uses a different @acronym{API}, its
behaviour depends on that of the backing @acronym{API}, and it is
monitor-specific.

@itemize
@item
The OS X @emph{FSEvents} @acronym{API} will always recurse
subdirectories when monitoring a directory.  In this case, even though
@option{-r} is not specified, the monitor will monitor a directory's
children nonetheless and there is no way to avoid it@footnote{But
manually filtering out events based on paths, but @command{fswatch}
does not do so @emph{by design}.}.

@item
The @emph{kqueue} monitor opens a file descriptor for each watched
file.  When @option{-r} is used and a directory is watched,
@command{fswatch} will walk the file system hierarchy rooted at the
directory and will open a file descriptor for each children to
establish a watch on it.

@item
The @emph{File Events Notification} monitor does not recurse
subdirectories by default.  If a directory is watched, change events
for the directory are received and even if some of them may be
triggered by changes to some of the directory children, no details
about their source will be provided.  When the @option{-r} option is
specified, the monitor will walk the file system hierarchy rooted at
the directory and will watch all of its children.

@item
The @emph{inotify} and @code{ReadDirectoryChangesW} @acronym{API}
returns change events for first-level children of a directory.  When
the @option{-r} option is not specified, change events for a watched
directory's children are received.  When the @option{-r} is specified,
the monitor will walk the file system hierarchy rooted at the watched
directory and will establish a watch on every directory object found.
@end itemize

In general, users should always use the @option{-r} option according
to its semantics, no matter what the monitor does.  The only case when
@option{-r} is `not' honoured is when a monitor @emph{adds}
information by recursively monitoring children even when @option{-r}
is not specified.  Please notice that when this happens, there may be
no performance overhead since the backing @acronym{API} is
specifically designed to behave like this.

The authors think this is not a problem.  If you think this behaviour
can be improved, please fill a bug report (@pxref{Reporting Bugs and
Suggestions}).

@subsection Recursively Watching Directories
@cpindex monitor, recursive scanning, directories
Some monitors such as the @emph{kqueue} monitor require a file
descriptor to be open for each watched file system object.  This
imposes a limitation on the maximum number of files that can be
watched by @command{fswatch}.  Before version 1.7, a user could only
overcome this problem by increasing the maximum number of open file
handles on its system.

@command{fswatch} 1.7.0 introduced a new option,
@option{-d}/@option{--directories}; when this option is used with a
monitor that supports it, only directory objects will be watched
during recursive scans.  When a change occurs on a file, instead of
reporting @emph{which} file has changed and how, @command{fswatch}
will report a change event on the parent directory: this way, the
number of required open file handles decreases at the expense of
change event information granularity.

@section Monitor Tunables
@anchor{Monitor Tunables}
@cpindex monitor, tunable
Some monitors may accept monitor-specific parameters to tune their
behaviour.  To this purpose, @command{fswatch} offers a mechanism to
pass key-value pair which are literally passed to the underlying
monitor.  A key-value pair @code{(k, v)} can be passed to a monitor
using the @code{--monitor-property} option:

@example
$ fswatch --monitor-property k=v ~
@end example

@noindent
Multiple key-value pairs can be passed by using the
@code{--monitor-property} option multiple times.

@node Monitors
@chapter Monitors
@cpindex monitor, available
@command{fswatch} is a file system monitoring utility that achieves
portability across multiple platforms by decoupling the front-end (the
@command{fswatch} itself) from back-end logic.  Back-end logic is
encapsulated in multiple, system-specific @emph{monitors}, interacting
with different monitoring @acronym{API}s.  Since each operating system
may ship a different set of @acronym{API}s@footnote{In fact, only OS X
supports more than one such @acronym{API}: BSD's @emph{kqueue} and
@emph{FSEvents}.}, each operating system will support the
corresponding set of monitors.

The list of available monitors is decided at build time by the
@command{configure} script.  Monitors cannot be currently plugged-in
but recompiling the @command{libfswatch} library (shipped with
@command{fswath}).  The list of available monitors can be obtained in
the help message:

@example
$ fswatch --help
[...]
Available monitors in this platform:

  fsevents_monitor
  kqueue_monitor
  poll_monitor
[...]
@end example

@section Available Monitors
@cpindex monitors, available
Currently, the available monitors are:

@itemize
@item
The @emph{FSEvents} monitor, a monitor based on the File System Events
@acronym{API} of Apple OS X (@pxref{The FSEvents Monitor}).

@item
The @emph{kqueue} monitor, a monitor based on @emph{kqueue}, an event
notification interface introduced in FreeBSD 4.1 and supported on most
*BSD systems (including OS X) (@pxref{The kqueue Monitor}).

@item
The @emph{File Events Notification} monitor, a monitor based on the
File Events Notification @acronym{API} of the Solaris/Illumos kernel
(@pxref{The File Events Notification Monitor}).

@item
The @emph{inotify} monitor, a Linux kernel subsystem that reports file
system changes to applications (@pxref{The inotify Monitor}).

@item
The @emph{Windows} monitor, a monitor that uses the Microsoft Windows'
@code{ReadDirectoryChangesW} function and reads change events
asynchronously.

@item
The @emph{poll} monitor, a monitor that periodically stats the file
system, saves file modification times in memory and manually
calculates file system changes, which can work on any operating system
where @command{stat} can be used (@pxref{The Poll Monitor}).
@end itemize

Each monitor has its own strengths, weakness and peculiarities.
Although @command{fswatch} strives to provide a uniform experience no
matter which monitor is used, it is still important for users to know
which monitor they are using and to be aware of existing bugs,
limitations, corner cases or pathological behaviour.

@section The FSEvents Monitor
@anchor{The FSEvents Monitor}
@cpindex FSEvents monitor
@cpindex monitor, FSEvents
The FSEvents monitor, available only on Apple OS X, has no known
limitations and scales very well with the number of files being
observed.  In fact, I observed no performance degradation when testing
@command{fswatch} observing changes on a filesystem of 500
@acronym{GB} over long periods of time.  This is the default monitor
on Apple OS X.

@subsection Peculiarities
@cpindex monitor, FSEvents, peculiarities
The (@option{--recursive}, @option{-r}) and (@option{--directories},
@option{-d}) options have no effect when used with the FSEvents
monitor since the FSEvents @acronym{API} already monitors a
directory's children by default.  There is no overhead nor
resource-consumption issue with this behaviour, but users processing
the output must be aware that for each directory @emph{multiple}
events may be generated by its children.

@subsection Custom Properties
@cpindex monitor, FSEvents, custom properties

@table @code
@item darwin.eventStream.noDefer
Enable the @code{kFSEventStreamCreateFlagNoDefer} flag in the event
stream.

If you specify this flag and more than latency seconds have elapsed
since the last event, your app will receive the event immediately.  The
delivery of the event resets the latency timer and any further events
will be delivered after latency seconds have elapsed.  This flag is
useful for apps that are interactive and want to react immediately to
changes but avoid getting swamped by notifications when changes are
occurring in rapid succession.  If you do not specify this flag, then
when an event occurs after a period of no events, the latency timer is
started.  Any events that occur during the next latency seconds will be
delivered as one group (including that first event).  The delivery of
the group of events resets the latency timer and any further events will
be delivered after latency seconds.  This is the default behavior and is
more appropriate for background, daemon or batch processing apps.

@end table

@section The kqueue Monitor
@anchor{The kqueue Monitor}
@cpindex kqueue monitor
@cpindex monitor, kqueue
@fnindex @command{kevent}
The kqueue monitor, available on any *BSD system featuring the
@command{kevent} function, is very similar in principle to other
similar @acronym{API}s (such as FSEvents and inotify) but has
important drawback and limitations.

@subsection Peculiarities
@cpindex monitor, kqueue, peculiarities
The kqueue monitor @emph{requires a file descriptor to be opened for
every file being watched}.  As a result, this monitor scales
@emph{badly} with the number of files being observed and may begin to
misbehave as soon as the @command{fswatch} process runs out of file
descriptors.  In this case, @command{fswatch} dumps one error on
standard error for every file that cannot be opened so that users are
notified and can take action, including terminating the
@command{fswatch} session.  Beware that on some systems the maximum
number of file descriptors that can be opened by a process is set to a
@emph{very low value} (values as low as 256 are not uncommon), even if
the operating system may allow a much larger value.

If you are running out of file descriptors when using this monitor and
you cannot reduce the number of observed items, either:

@itemize
@item
Consider raising the number of maximum open file descriptors (check
your OS' documentation).

@item
Consider using the (@option{--directories}, @option{-d}) option.

@item
Consider using another monitor.
@end itemize

@section The File Events Notification Monitor
@anchor{The File Events Notification Monitor}
@cpindex File Events Notification monitor
@cpindex monitor, File Events Notification
The @emph{File Events Notification} monitor is backed by the File
Events Notification @acronym{API} of the Solaris/Illumos kernel.  This
monitor is very efficient, it suffers from no known
resource-exhaustion problems and it scales very well with the number
of objects being watched.  This monitor is the default monitor on
systems running a Solaris or Illumos kernel providing this
@acronym{API}.

@section The inotify Monitor
@anchor{The inotify Monitor}
@cpindex inotify monitor
@cpindex monitor, inotify
@fnindex @command{inotify_init}
@fnindex @command{inotify_rm_watch}
@fnindex @command{inotify_add_watch}
The @emph{inotify} monitor is backed by the inotify @acronym{API} and
the @code{inotify_*} set of functions, introduced on Linux since
kernel 2.6.13.  Similarly to the FSEvents @acronym{API}, inotify is
very efficient, it suffers from no known resource-exhaustion problems
and it scales very well with the number of objects being watched.
This monitor is the default monitor on systems running inotify-enabled
Linux kernels.

@subsection Peculiarities
@cpindex monitor, inotify, peculiarities
@subsubsection Queue Overflow
@cpindex monitor, inotify, queue overflow
@cpindex monitor, inotify, overflow
@cpindex queue overflow
The inotify monitor may suffer a queue overflow if events are
generated faster than they are read from the queue.  In any case, the
application is guaranteed to receive an overflow notification which
can be handled to gracefully recover.

By default, the @command{fswatch} process is terminated after the
notification is sent by throwing an exception.  Using the
@option{--allow-overflow} option makes @command{fswatch} emit a change
event of type @command{Overflow} without exiting.

@subsubsection Duplicate Events
@cpindex monitor, inotify, duplicate events
The inotify @acronym{API} sends events for the @emph{direct} child
elements of a watched directory and it scales pretty well with the
number of watched items.  For this reason, depending on the number of
files to watch, it may sometimes be preferable to non-recursively
watch a common parent directory and filter received events rather than
adding a huge number of file watches.  If recursive watches are used,
then duplicate change events will be received:

@itemize
@item
One generated by the parent directory of the file that has changed.

@item
One generated by the file that has changed.
@end itemize

@section The Windows monitor
@anchor{The Windows monitor}
@cpindex Windows monitor
@cpindex monitor, Windows
The Windows monitor uses the Windows' @code{ReadDirectoryChangesW}
function for each watched path and asynchronously waits for change
events using overlapped I/O.  The Windows monitor is the default
choice on Windows because it is the best performing monitor on that
platform and it is affected by virtually no limitations.

@subsection Peculiarities
@cpindex monitor, Windows, peculiarities
@subsubsection Buffer Overflow
@cpindex monitor, Windows, buffer overflow
@cpindex monitor, Windows, overflow
@cpindex buffer overflow
The Windows monitor may suffer a buffer overflow if events are
generated faster than they can be stored in the buffer allocated by
the operating system when @code{ReadDirectoryChangesW} is first called
on a watched path.  Once the buffer has been created, it is never
resized and will live until the file handle events are listened upon
is closed.

Another source of overflow is the size of the buffer passed to
@code{ReadDirectoryChangesW} by its caller.  Unless the one created by
Windows, this buffer's size can be tuned by the user.  The custom
@code{windows.ReadDirectoryChangesW.buffer.size} property can be used
to programmatically set the size of the buffer (in bytes) when
@command{fswatch} is invoked, as shown in the following example where a 4
kilobytes buffer is used:

@example
$ fswatch --monitor-property \
    windows.ReadDirectoryChangesW.buffer.size=4096 \
    ~
@end example

By default, the @command{fswatch} process is terminated after the
notification is sent by throwing an exception.  Using the
@command{--allow-overflow} option makes @command{fswatch} emit a change
event of type @command{Overflow} without exiting.

@subsubsection Directory Watching
The Windows @acronym{API} lets user watch @emph{directory}, not
@emph{files}.  @command{fswatch} currently passes path arguments to the
underlying monitor as they are: as a consequence, if a path
corresponds to a file, the monitor will emit an error and will not be
able to watch it.

For the same reasons, the (@option{--directories}/@option{-d}) has no
effect when using this monitor.

@subsubsection Recursivity
The Windows @acronym{API} will return change events related to a
watched directory and any children of its, at any depth.  Essentially,
the subtree rooted at a directory is @emph{recursively} watched even
if the @code{-r} option is not used explicitly.

@section The Poll Monitor
@anchor{The Poll Monitor}
@cpindex Poll monitor
@cpindex monitor, poll
The poll monitor was added as a fallback mechanisms in the cases where
no other monitor could be used, including:

@itemize
@item
Operating system without any sort of file events @acronym{API}.

@item
Situations where the limitations of the available monitors cannot be
overcome@footnote{E.g.: observing a number of files greater than the
available file descriptors on a system using the kqueue monitor.}.
@end itemize

The poll monitor, available on any platform, only relies on available
@acronym{CPU} and memory to perform its task.

@subsection Peculiarities
@cpindex monitor, poll, peculiarities

@subsubsection Performance Problems
@cpindex monitor, poll, performanc
The resource consumption of this monitor increases increases
@emph{linearly} with the number of files being watched (the resulting
system performance will probably degrade @emph{linearly} or quicker).

@fnindex @command{stat}
The authors' experience indicates that @command{fswatch} requires
approximately 150 @acronym{MB} of @acronym{RAM} memory to observe a
hierarchy of 500,000 files with a minimum path length of 32
characters.  A common bottleneck of the poll monitor is disk access,
since @command{stat()}-ing a great number of files may take a
@emph{huge} amount of time.  In this case, the latency
(@pxref{Latency}) should be set to a sufficiently large value in order
to reduce the performance degradation that may result from frequent
disk access; this monitor, in fact, will re-scan @emph{all} the
monitored object hierarchy looking for differences @emph{every} time
its `monitoring loop' is repeated.

@quotation Note
Using a disk drive with lower latencies may certainly help, although
the authors suspect that switching to an operating system with proper
file monitoring @acronym{API}s is a better solution when performance
problems with the poll monitors are experienced or when
@command{fswatch} should drive mission-critical processes.
@end quotation

@subsubsection Missing Events and Missing Event Flags
@cpindex monitor, poll, missing events
@cpindex missing events
Since this monitor periodically checks the state of monitored objects
looking for differences, it may miss events happened between one scan
and another.  Let's suppose, for example, that a file @file{file}
exists at time @math{t_0} when a scan occurs.  The poll monitors
detects @file{file} and saves the relevant attributes in memory.
@file{file} is then updated, moved to another place and recreated with
the same name.  The chain of events@footnote{The actual chain of
events may in fact vary depending on the monitor being used.}
occurred to @file{file} are:

@itemize
@item
@command{Updated}

@item
@command{MovedFrom} (or @command{Deleted})

@item
@command{Created}

@item
@command{Link}
@end itemize

At time @math{t_1}, another scan runs and the poll monitor detects
that the modification date has changed.  The poll monitor can only
infer that a `change' has occurred and raises an @command{Updated}
event; other events that would be noticed and raised by other
@acronym{API}s are effectively @emph{lost} since they go unnoticed.

The odds of incurring such a loss is inversely proportional to the
latency @math{l}: reducing the latency helps alleviating this problem,
although on the other hands it also results in linearly increasing
resource usage.

@section How to Choose a Monitor
@command{fswatch} already chooses the `best' monitor for your platform
if you do not specify any.  However, a specific monitor may be better
suited to specific use cases.  Please, see @ref{Monitors} to get a
description of all the available monitors and their limitations.

Usage recommendations are as follows:

@itemize

@item
On Apple OS X, use only the FSEvents monitor (which is the default
behaviour).

@item
On Solaris/Illumos-based systems, use the File Events Notification
monitor.

@item
On Linux, use the inotify monitor (which is the default behaviour).

@item
If the number of files to observe is sufficiently small, use the
kqueue monitor.  Beware that on some systems the maximum number of
file descriptors that can be opened by a process is set to a very
@emph{low} value (values as low as 256 are not uncommon), even if the
operating system may allow a much larger value.  In this case, check
your OS documentation to raise this limit on either a per process or a
system-wide basis.

@item
If feasible, watch directories instead of watching files.  Properly
crafting the receiving side of the events to deal with directories may
sensibly reduce the monitor resource consumption.

@item
@fnindex @command{stat}
If none of the above applies, use the poll monitor.  The authors'
experience indicates that fswatch requires approximately 150
@acronym{MB} of @acronym{RAM} memory to observe a hierarchy of 500,000
files with a minimum path length of 32 characters.  A common
bottleneck of the poll monitor is disk access, since
@command{stat()}-ing a great number of files may take a huge amount of
time.  In this case, the latency should be set to a sufficiently large
value in order to reduce the performance degradation that may result
from frequent disk access.
@end itemize

@node GNU Free Documentation License
@appendix GNU Free Documentation License

@include fdl.texi

@c Print function index
@node Index of Functions
@appendix Index of Functions

@printindex fn

@c Print program index
@node Index of Programs
@appendix Index of Programs

@printindex pg

@c Print file index
@node Index of Files
@appendix Index of Files

@printindex fl

@c Print option index
@node Index of Command Line Options
@appendix Index of Command Line Options
This appendix contains an index of all @command{fswatch} long command
line options.  The options are listed without the preceding
double-dash.

@printindex op

@node General Index
@unnumbered Index
@printindex cp

@bye
